Composer tuning (#6)
mkuthan/mkuthan.github.io: _posts/2022-03-16-gcp-cloud-composer-tuning.md

But the reality of real life has forced me to tune to the obsolete version.
{: .notice--warning}

## Overview

*Cloud Composer* is a fully managed workflow orchestration service built on [Apache Airflow](https://airflow.apache.org).
*Cloud Composer* is a magnitude easier to set up than vanilla *Apache Airflow*, but there are still some gotchas:

* How many resources are allocated by the single *Apache Airflow* task?
* How many concurrent tasks can be executed on the worker, what is a real worker capacity?
* What is a total parallelism of the whole *Cloud Composer* cluster?
* How to choose the right virtual machine type and how to configure *Apache Airflow* to fully utilize the allocated resources?
* What are the most important *Cloud Composer* performance metrics to monitor?

## Tasks

Let's begin with the *Apache Airflow* basic unit of work - [task](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/tasks.html).
There are two main kind of tasks: [operators](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/operators.html) 
and [sensors](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/sensors.html).

> On my *Cloud Composer* installation operators are mainly responsible for creating the ephemeral [Dataproc](https://cloud.google.com/dataproc) clusters and submit [Apache Spark](https://spark.apache.org) batch jobs to this clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In my *Cloud Composer* installation operators are mainly responsible for creating the ephemeral [Dataproc](https://cloud.google.com/dataproc) clusters and submit [Apache Spark](https://spark.apache.org) batch jobs to this clusters.
```

In contrast, the sensors wait for [BigQuery](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery) data, the payload for the Spark jobs.
From the performance perspective, the operators are much more resource heavy than sensors.

> *BigQuery* sensors are short-lived tasks, the sensor checks for the data and if data exists the sensor quickly finishes.

Reviewer: Czy tutaj nie warto by wspomnieć o tym, że to nie jest domyślne ustawienie i my akurat używamy (i polecamy) tryb `reschedule`?

Author: masz rację, powinienem o tym jawnie napisać bo inaczej sensory też są heavy

run a dozen of tasks and measure the real resource utilization.
I would opt for the second, more practical option.

![Cloud Composer worker memory usage](/assets/images/cloud_composer_worker_memory_usage.webp)

For 12 concurrent running operators the workers' memory utilization increased from the steady state of 1.76GiB to 4.36GiB.
We do have the first insight in our tuning journey: every operator allocates approximately `(4.36GiB - 1.76GiB) / 12 =~ 220MiB` of RAM.
It is important that you should measure the task memory usage by yourself, all further calculations heavily depend on it.
The memory usage might be also varying for different *Apache Airflow* operators.

Whaaaat -- 220MiB allocated just for the REST call to the *Dataproc* cluster API?
Unfortunately it is not only the remote call. 
The architecture of the *Apache Airflow* is quite complex, every task is executed as a [Celery worker](https://docs.celeryproject.org/en/stable/userguide/workers.html) with its own overhead.
Every task also needs a connection to the *Apache Airflow* database, it also consumes resources.
Perhaps there are other factors I'm not even aware of ...
{: .notice--info}

## Worker Size

> We have already known the memory utilization by the single task. Although, how many tasks can be executed concurrently on the worker?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We already know the memory utilization of the single task. Let's find out how many tasks can be executed concurrently on the worker.
```

![Cloud Composer nodes for n1-standard-1](/assets/images/cloud_composer_nodes_n1_standard_1.webp)

*n2-standard-2* virtual machines: 6.34GB (**5.9GiB**)
![Cloud Composer nodes for n2-standard-2](/assets/images/cloud_composer_nodes_n2_standard_2.webp)

Thank you, Google, for using different units across the console. 
An intellectual challenge every time when I have to convert GB to GiB and vice-versa.
{: .notice--info}

### The costs

The minimal *Cloud Composer* cluster has to consist of at least three workers.
But the workers are only a part of total *Cloud Composer* [costs](https://cloud.google.com/products/calculator#tab=composer).
Below you can find the estimated monthly costs for 3-nodes *Cloud Composer* installation in eu-west1 region.
As you can see, for larger workers you will get more compute power for just a little more money.

| Worker        | CPUs | MEM     | Estimated monthly cost |
| ------------- | ---: | ------: | ---------------------: |
| n1-standard-1 | 1    | 3.75GiB | ~ $410                 |
| n2-standard-2 | 2    | 8GiB    | ~ $510                 |
| n2-highmem-2  | 2    | 16GB    | ~ $570                 |

> Based on my experiences, real costs are ~20% higher than presented numbers.

Reviewer: Ciekawe z czego to wynika... 🤔

Author: dopiszę moje przypuszczenie - realny composer coś jednak robi, zajrzę jeszcze do metryk appperf - może być też tak że kalkulator coś po prostu pomija

Author: oj dobry insight wyszedł

{: .notice--info}

### *Cloud Composer* overhead

Kubernetes is not the only overhead you have to count into the calculations.
There are also many built-in *Cloud Composer* processes run on every worker.

> As long as the *Cloud Composer* is a managed service, you don't have control over these processes.

Reviewer: Nie chodziło raczej o:
```suggestion
Because the *Cloud Composer* is a managed service, you don't have control over these processes.
```

* **core.parallelism** -- The maximum number of task instances that can run concurrently in Airflow regardless of worker count, 18 if not specified explicitly.
* **celery.worker_concurrency** -- Defines the number of task instances that a worker will take, 6 for 3-nodes cluster if not specified explicitly.

In my 3-workers cluster scenario the following settings should be applied.

| Worker        | core.parallelism | celery.worker_concurrency |
| ------------- |----------------: |-------------------------: |
| n1-standard-1 |               12 |                         4 |
| n2-standard-2 |               51 |                        17 |
| n2-highmem-2  |              141 |                        47 |

As you can see, *Cloud Composer* defaults do not match any of the presented worker types.
Defaults for the cluster of the smallest virtual machines are too optimistic, and I observed many pod evictions.
For the virtual machines with 4GiB of RAM or more, the cluster with default settings is underutilized, you pay for nothing.
{: .notice--info}

### Scheduler

> I have also found two another *Apache Airflow* properties worth to modify: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I have also found two other *Apache Airflow* properties worth modifying: 
```

* **scheduler.min_file_process_interval** -- The minimum interval after which a DAG file is parsed and tasks are scheduled, 0 if not specified.
* **scheduler.parsing_processes** -- Defines how many DAGs parsing processes will run in parallel, 2 if not specified.

I highly recommend setting `scheduler.min_file_process_interval` to at least 30 seconds, to avoid high CPU usage on the worker where the *airflow-scheduler* pod is running.
The [scheduler](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/scheduler.html) is running only on the single worker,
so it heavily impacts the other processes and tasks on this worker.

The `scheduler.parsing_processes` should be set to `max(1, number of CPUs - 1)`, set to 1 unless you define workers with 3 CPUs or more.

> Again it should lower the CPU utilization on the worker when the *airflow-scheduler* pod is running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Again it should lower the CPU utilization on the worker which is running the *airflow-scheduler* pod.
```

{: .notice--info}

> Scheduler is a very important process of *Apache Airflow*, when it does not work properly you will observe many weird and hard to debug flaws.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scheduler is a very important process of *Apache Airflow*. When it does not work properly you will observe many weird and hard to debug flaws.
```
